docs: add specification of zkvm prover (#19)
kroma-network/kroma-specs: specs/experimental/zk-fault-dipute-game/overview.md

# ZK Fault Dispute Game
<!-- All glossary references in this file. -->

[g-zk-fault-proof]: ../../glossary.md#zk-fault-proof
[g-l2-chain-derivation]: ../../glossary.md#l2-chain-derivation
[g-sequencer-batch]: ../../glossary.md#sequencer-batch
[g-dispute-game]: ../../experimental/zk-fault-dipute-game/overview.md

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**

> - [ZK Fault Dispute Game](#zk-fault-dispute-game)

Author: I'm not sure why these changes occurred. The changes were made by the `lint-specs-md-fix`, but should i revert them? @0xHansLee

Reviewer: This may be due to the header I manually added, `# ZK Fault Dispute Game`, so please ignore this.
I'll make appropriate changes in the last touch.

# ZK Fault Dispute Game
<!-- All glossary references in this file. -->

[g-zk-fault-proof]: ../../glossary.md#zk-fault-proof
[g-l2-chain-derivation]: ../../glossary.md#l2-chain-derivation
[g-sequencer-batch]: ../../glossary.md#sequencer-batch

> [g-dispute-game]: ../../experimental/zk-fault-dipute-game/overview.md

Reviewer 2: This link just represents this file, so I think it's better to add it later when related terms are added to `glossary.md`.
```suggestion
```

## Dissection

## Proving Fault using zkVM

### ZK Fault Proof

A [ZK fault proof][g-zk-fault-proof] demonstrates that a state transition from S to S’ is valid based on the
transactions within the block. While this may seem similar to a validity proof, the key difference lies in its
purpose. The ZK fault proof is used to demonstrate that a state transition from S to S’’ is incorrect by
providing evidence of a valid state transition from S to S’.

### zkVM Proving System

The zkVM (Zero-Knowledge Virtual Machine) is a virtual machine that executes guest program compiled with a specified
compiler generating zero-knowledge proofs for their execution. The guest program can be written in standard programming
languages, such as Rust and Go.

#### Guest Program

For ZK Fault Dispute Game, the guest program is an extension of [L2 Chain Derivation][g-l2-chain-derivation] that
includes a connectivity check among the blocks from L1 origin block to the specified block `C`. The hash of Block
`C` is determined as the parent hash stored when the ZK Fault Dispute Game is created by calling `create()` of

> the [Dispute Game Factory].

Reviewer: need link for this

Author: The link is already located at the end of section!

## Dissection

## Proving Fault using zkVM

### ZK Fault Proof

A [ZK fault proof][g-zk-fault-proof] demonstrates that a state transition from S to S’ is valid based on the
transactions within the block. While this may seem similar to a validity proof, the key difference lies in its
purpose. The ZK fault proof is used to demonstrate that a state transition from S to S’’ is incorrect by
providing evidence of a valid state transition from S to S’.

> ### zkVM Proof

Reviewer: This is more like related to zkVM, not zkVM proof imo
```suggestion
### zkVM
```

[Optimism's Fault Dispute Game]: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/specs/blob/46d411bfea922c520a1d43329dbf78a2f6966ae0/specs/fault-proof/stage-one/fault-dispute-game.md#fault-dispute-game

#### Public Values of Proof

To mark which blocks have been executed, the proof publicly reveals the following data.

``` plain
1. Output root at the parent block of the target
2. Output root at the target block
3. Hash of the block C
```

#### `ZkVerifier` interface

The proof generated by a prover can be verified on a verifier contract that includes the following interface.
The verification in a challenge process will be implemented using the verify function provided by the verifier contract.

``` solidity
interface ZKVerifier {
    /// @notice The entrypoint for verifying the proof of zk fault proof.
    /// @param _publicValues The encoded public values.
    /// @param _proofBytes The encoded proof.
    /// @return parentOutputRoot The output root at the parent block of the target.
    /// @return outputRoot The output root at the target block.

>     /// @return L1EndHash The hash of the l1 end block.

Reviewer: `L1EndHash` seems not to be clear. How about using just `l1BlockHash`? And describe what it is in description.
```suggestion
    /// @return l1BlockHash The block hash of L1 block stored in ZK fault dispute game contract.
```

Author: The term 'l1BlockHash' (the variable name) is too general. It would be better if it included a more specific meaning. So how about keeping it as it is?

Reviewer: Ok, then how about `l1Head` as used in `FaultDisputeGame`? They used the term `l1Head` for the block hash.

https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/optimism/blob/0cf2a11611d329b9c6d53fd6473dbbc44f68e94c/packages/contracts-bedrock/src/dispute/interfaces/IDisputeGame.sol#L46-L46

Reviewer: @dongchangYoo please check this. Excepting this, all looks good to me.

Author: It hash been changed.

### Prover

A prover plays a vital role in the challenge process, acting as an integral part of the challenger responsible
for generating proof for the target block. This proof substantiates claims regarding the legitimacy of block data
and state transitions.
A [ZK fault proof][g-zk-fault-proof] demonstrates that a state transition from S to S’ is valid based on the
transactions within the block. While this may seem similar to a validity proof, the key difference lies in its
purpose. The ZK fault proof is used to demonstrate that a state transition from S to S’’ is incorrect by
providing evidence of a valid state
transition from S to S’.

### zkVM Proof

The zkVM (Zero-Knowledge Virtual Machine) is a virtual machine that executes guest program compiled with a specified
compiler generating zero-knowledge proofs for their execution. The guest program can be written in standard programming
languages, such as Rust and Go.

#### Guest Program

In the case of the ZK fault proof, the guest program is an extension of [L2 Chain Derivation][g-l2-chain-derivation]
that includes a connectivity check among the blocks from L1 origin block and the specified block `C`. The hash of

> Block `C` is determined as the parent hash stored when the challenger initialized the [Dispute Game][g-dispute-game]

Reviewer: To be clarify, the dispute game is created and initialized by asserter who is game creator of dispute game. And challenger will create challenge against the claim if he/she think the submitted claim of dispute game is invalid. 
```suggestion
Block `C` is determined as the parent hash stored when the [Dispute Game][g-dispute-game] is created in Dispute Game Factory
```

by calling `create()` of the Dispute Game Factory.
If the guest program consists only of L2 Chain Derivation, the challenger could create a proof with transactions that
are not the actual transactions of the target block by manipulating an L1 Block that contains an

> [g-sequencer-batch][g-sequencer-batch].

Reviewer: This seems awkward in context. Rather, why not add in L59 that the L2 Chain Derivation and connectivity checks guarantee that it executes the actual transaction posted by sequencer?

> ## Proving Fault using ZKVM

Reviewer 2: Isn't zkVM natural than ZKVM?
```suggestion
## Proving Fault using zkVM
```

> ### Prover
> 
> A prover plays a vital role in the challenge process, acting as an integral part of the challenger responsible
> for generating proof for the target block. This proof substantiates claims regarding the legitimacy of block data
> and state transitions.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if Prover part is necessary for this section, Proving Fault using ZKVM. How about changing like below?
```suggestion
### ZK Fault Proof
```

> A [ZK fault proof][g-zk-fault-proof] demonstrates that a state transition from S to S’ is valid based on the

Reviewer 2: If you intended one line separation between these two paragraphs, an empty line should be added here.
```suggestion

A [ZK fault proof][g-zk-fault-proof] demonstrates that a state transition from S to S’ is valid based on the
```

transactions within the block. While this may seem similar to a validity proof, the key difference lies in its
purpose. The ZK fault proof is used to demonstrate that a state transition from S to S’’ is incorrect by
providing evidence of a valid state

> transition from S to S’.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
providing evidence of a valid state transition from S to S’.
```

### zkVM Proof

The zkVM (Zero-Knowledge Virtual Machine) is a virtual machine that executes guest program compiled with a specified
compiler generating zero-knowledge proofs for their execution. The guest program can be written in standard programming
languages, such as Rust and Go.

#### Guest Program

> In the case of the ZK fault proof, the guest program is an extension of [L2 Chain Derivation][g-l2-chain-derivation]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For ZK Fault Dispute Game, the guest program is an extension of [L2 Chain Derivation][g-l2-chain-derivation]
```

> that includes a connectivity check among the blocks from L1 origin block and the specified block `C`. The hash of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that includes a connectivity check among the blocks from L1 origin block to the specified block `C`. The hash of
```

Block `C` is determined as the parent hash stored when the [Dispute Game][g-dispute-game] is created in Dispute Game

> Factory by calling `create()` of the Dispute Game Factory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
block `C` is determined as the parent hash stored when the ZK Fault Dispute Game is created by calling `create()` of
Dispute Game Factory.

```

Reviewer 2: Also how about just adding DisputeGameFactory link of Optimism? Since we are planning to use the same contract.

If the attacker manipulates any data within the extension of L2 Chain Derivation, it will affect the block hash `C`.
This is because all data is ultimately linked to the block hash `C` through the hash chain. Therefore if any data

> manipulating attack be thwarted by checking the block hash `C` value. For example, if an attacker creates a proof

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
manipulating attack can be thwarted by checking the block hash `C` value. For example, if an attacker creates a proof
```

> using a transaction that is not included in the [sequencer-batch][g-sequencer-batch], the block `C` value will change,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using a transaction that is not included in the [sequencer batch][g-sequencer-batch], the block `C` value will change,
```

preventing them from winning the challenge.

#### Host Program

The host program is a main part of the prover, responsible for delivering the guest program and its input to the zkVM.

> The host program first executes the guest program logic to gather the necessary data, which is equal to what is stored
> in the [PreImageOracle] during the [Optimism's Dispute Game], but the block headers from the L1 block containing
> the [sequencer-batch][g-sequencer-batch] up to block `C` must be included. Finally, the host program delivers the guest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The host program first executes the guest program to gather the necessary data, which is called [PreImageOracle] in [Optimism's Dispute Game]. For ZKFDG, however, additional data is required for PreImageOracle, which is the L1 block data from the origin of target L2 block to block `C`. Finally, the host program delivers the guest
```

Reviewer 2: I think we don't use PreImageOracle, so better to remove that part.
```suggestion
The host program first executes the guest program to gather the necessary data, which is same as the data stored in [PreImageOracle] during [Optimism's Fault Dispute Game]. For ZKFDG, however, additional data is required, which is the L1 block data from the origin of target L2 block to block `C`. Finally, the host program delivers the guest
```

Reviewer: Actually, we use PreImageOracle off-chain (in prover), not on-chain. That's why @dongchangYoo add this part. The spec of PreImageOracle for guest program is the same with Optimism's. The only difference is the L1 Block info for validation of connectivity of L1 blocks.

Author: @0xHansLee Since `PreImageOracle` is a contract, not a data, i think that
```
the necessary data, which is equal to what is stored in the [PreImageOracle] during the [Optimism's Dispute Game]
```
is more accurate than
```
necessary data, which is called [PreImageOracle] in [Optimism's Dispute Game]
```

Reviewer: Oh, I see. Let's go as you write.

program and the preimages to the zkVM to obtain the zkVM proof.

> [PreImageOracle]: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/specs/blob/main/specs/fault-proof/stage-one/fault-dispute-game.md#preimageoracle

Reviewer: I don't think it is sufficient as a spec of preimage oracle. Is there any detailed spec of preimage oracle for the guest program such as kona? It seems quite abstractive to me.

Author: Does the Optimism spec provide a more detailed explanation of this data?

Reviewer: I think more detailed spec for preimage data would be good than the link.

Reviewer: If there is no, let's go as is.

> [PreImageOracle]: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/specs/blob/main/specs/fault-proof/stage-one/fault-dispute-game.md#preimageoracle
> [Optimism's Dispute Game]: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/specs/blob/main/specs/fault-proof/stage-one/fault-dispute-game.md#fault-dispute-game

Reviewer 2: It's better to fix the link to specific commit.
```suggestion
[PreImageOracle]: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/specs/blob/46d411bfea922c520a1d43329dbf78a2f6966ae0/specs/fault-proof/stage-one/fault-dispute-game.md#preimageoracle
[Optimism's Dispute Game]: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/specs/blob/46d411bfea922c520a1d43329dbf78a2f6966ae0/specs/fault-proof/stage-one/fault-dispute-game.md#fault-dispute-game
```

#### Public Values of Proof

To mark which blocks have been executed, the proof publicly reveals the following data.

``` plain

> 1. Output Root at parent block of the target
> 2. Output Root at the target block

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Output root at the parent block
2. Output root at the target block
```

3. Hash of the block C
```

> #### Zk Verify contract

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### `ZKVerifier` Interface
```

The proof generated by a prover can be verified on a verifier contract that includes the following interface.

> The verification in a challenge process is implemented using the verify function provided by the verifier contract.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The verification in a challenge process will be implemented using the verify function provided by the verifier contract.
```

``` solidity
interface ZKVerifier {
    /// @notice The entrypoint for verifying the proof of zk fault proof.

>     /// @param _proofBytes The encoded proof.
>     /// @param _publicValues The encoded public values.
>     /// @return parentOutputRoot output root at parent block of the target.
>     /// @return outputRoot output root at the target block.
>     /// @return L1EndHash hash of the l1 end block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    /// @param _publicValues The encoded public values.
    /// @param _proofBytes The encoded proof.
    /// @return parentOutputRoot The output root at the parent block.
    /// @return outputRoot The output root at the target block.
    /// @return L1EndHash The hash of the l1 end block.
```

    function verify(
      bytes calldata _publicValues, 
      bytes calldata _proofBytes
    ) public view returns (
      bytes32 parentOutputRoot, 
      bytes32 outputRoot, 
      bytes32 L1EndHash
    );
}
```

> ## Prover as an RPC Server

Reviewer 2: Maybe this title level is more proper for this section.
```suggestion
### Prover as an RPC Server
```

> ## Prover as an RPC Server

Reviewer: Do we need to this section for ZKFDG spec? It's more like docs, not spec.

Author: Do you mean that we should remove the 'Prover as an RPC Server' section?

Reviewer: Yes, what do you think?

`kroma-prover` is implemented as a jsonRPC server that generates a zkVM proof for the requested height block.

> It can be utilized as a local component on the challenger's machine or as a remote jsonRPC server (prover as a service).

Reviewer: I think we don't need this in specs.
```suggestion
```
